---
layout: post
title: HerRights - Unveiling 10 Safety Rights You Might Not Know
categories: blog1
subtitle: By Supriti Vijay
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/blog1.jpeg
tags: [Laws, safety]
direct_url: 'https://felasa-initiative.github.io/2023-04-01-TopLaws/'
---
Many are unaware of the protective laws designed for women in the labyrinth of legalities today. Knowledge is power—especially for women juggling roles as parents, wives, daughters, employees, and individuals. This article sheds light on ten pivotal laws in India crafted to ensure women's safety.

## 1. No Woman Shall Be Arrested After Sunset & Before Sunrise

**Legal Basis:** Sub-section (4) of Section 46(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

Women cannot be arrested between 6 PM to 6 AM without prior permission from a Magistrate, and if mandated, it should only be conducted by a Lady Police Officer.

## 2. Women are Legally Entitled to Long-term Paid Leaves for Miscarriages or Pregnancy-related Complications

**Legal Basis:** Maternity Benefits Act

Women with a minimum of 80 days of employment in the 12 months before their anticipated delivery are eligible for maternity benefits, including maternity leave, nursing breaks, and a medical allowance. The law ensures long-term paid leaves in case of adverse incidents, during which termination is prohibited.

## 3. All Women, Married or Unmarried, Have the Right to Safe Abortion Under Law

**Legal Basis:** The Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Act

Every woman, regardless of marital status, has the legal entitlement to a safe abortion, guaranteeing privacy and the freedom to make personal choices. Abortion procedures require explicit consent, and spousal permission is not mandatory.

## 4. Women Have the Right to Take Up an Anonymous Identity for Sexual Assault Victims

**Legal Basis:** Section 228A of the Indian Penal Code

The identity of sexual assault victims must remain confidential, and any disclosure by the police or media is a punishable offense.

## 5. Women Have the Right to Lodge Virtual Complaints

Women can file complaints remotely by sending an email or registered post to a senior police officer of the level of Deputy Commissioner or Commissioner of Police.

## 6. Women Are Protected Against Stalking

**Legal Basis:** Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013

Stalking, both physical and cyber, is a recognized crime, and offenders can face imprisonment and penalties.

## 7. Women Have the Right to Zero FIR

 Women can register a complaint at any police station, and the FIR can later be transferred to the jurisdictional police station.

## 8. Women Have Access to Free Legal Aid

Women have the right to demand and receive free legal aid when seeking police assistance.

## 9. Women Are Protected Against Workplace Harassment

**Mandatory Requirement:** Sexual Harassment Complaints Committee

Every organization, public or private, must establish a committee to address sexual harassment complaints, with at least 50% of its members being women.

## 10. Women Have the Right to Privacy During Statement Recording

**Legal Basis:** Right to privacy during statement recording

Women who have experienced rape have the right to privacy when recording their statement, allowing them to do so in front of a magistrate or a lady constable in a private setting.

#### Sources -

1. https://www.herzindagi.com/society-culture/women-safety-indian-law-safeguards-for-woman-getting-stalked-article-142640

2. https://pinklegal.in/topics/child-related/abortion.html

3. https://yourstory.com/2016/06/laws-that-protect-women-rights?utm_pageloadtype=scroll 


<!-- ---
layout: page
title: 
subtitle: 
cover-img: /assets/img/legal_cover.jpeg
--- -->